CHAPTER I

All happy families resemble one another; every
unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.

All was confusion in the house of the Oblonskys.
The wife had discovered that her husband was having
an intrigue with a French governess who had been in
their employ, and she declared that she could not live
in the same house with him. This condition of things
had lasted now three days, and was causing deep dis-
comfort, not only to the husband and wife, but also to all
the members of the family and the domestics. All the
members of the family and the domestics felt that there
was no sense in their living together, and that in any
hotel people meeting casually had more mutual inter-
ests than they, the members of the family and the
domestics of the house of Oblonsky. The wife did not
come out of her own rooms ; the husband had not been
at home for two days. The children were running over
the whole house as if they were crazy ; the English
maid was angry with the housekeeper and wrote to a
friend begging her to find her a new place. The head
cook had departed the evening before just at dinner-
time ; the kitchen-maid and the coachman demanded
their wages.

On the third day after the quarrel, Prince Stepan
Arkadyevitch Oblonsky  Stiva, as he was called in
society  awoke at the usual hour, that is to say about
eight o'clock in the morning, not in his wife's chamber,
but in his library, on a leather-covered divan. He
turned his portly pampered body on the springs of the
divan, as if intending to go to sleep again, and as he
did so threw his arm round the cushion and pressed his
cheek to it. But suddenly he sat up and opened his eyes.

" Well, well ! how was it .-' " he mused, recalling a
dream. " Yes, how was it .'' Yes ! Alabin was giving a
dinner at Darmstadt ; no, not at Darmstadt, but it was
something American. Yes, but that Darmstadt was in
America. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass
tables, yes, and the tables sang '// inio tesoro ' / no, not
'// mio tesoro,' but something better; and some little
water-bottles, they were women ! " said he, continuing
his recollections.

Prince Stepan's eyes flashed gayly and he smiled as
he said to himself :

" Yes, it was very good, very good. There was some-
thing extremely elegant about it, but you can't tell it in
words, and when you are awake you can't express the
reality even in thought."

Then, as he noticed a ray of sunlight which came in at
the side of one of the heavy window-curtains, he gayly
set his feet down from the divan, found his gilt morocco
slippers  they had been embroidered for him by his wife
the year before as a birthday present  and, according
to an old custom which he had kept up for nine years,
he, without rising, stretched out his hand to the place
where in his chamber hung his dressing-gown. And then
he suddenly remembered how and why he had been
sleeping, not in his wife's chamber, but in the library;
the smile vanished from his face and he frowned.

" Akh ! akh ! akh ! akh ! " he groaned, as he recol-
lected everything that had occurred. And before his
mind arose once more all the details of the quarrel with
his wife, all the hopelessness of his situation, and most
lamentable of all, his own fault.

" No ! she will not and she cannot forgive me. And
what is the worst of it, 't was my own fault  my own
fault, and yet I am not to blame. In that lies all the
tragedy of it," he said to himself. "Akh ! akh ! akh ! "
he kept murmuring in his despair, as he thought over
the exceedingly unpleasant consequences that would
result to him from this quarrel.

The most disagreeable moment was at the very first,
when, as he came home from the theater, happy and
self-satisfied, bringing a monstrous pear for his wife, he
did not find her in the sitting-room, nor, to his surprise,
was she in the library, and at last he saw her in her cham-
ber holding the fatal, all-revealing letter in her hand.

She  Dolly, that forever busy and fussy and foolish
creature as he always considered her  was sitting mo-
tionless with the note in her hand, and looked at him
with an expression of terror, despair, and wrath.

" What is this ? This ? " she demanded, pointing to
the note.

And as often happens, Stepan's torment at this recollec-
tion was caused less by the fact itself than by the answer
which he gave to those words of his wife. His experi-
ence at that moment was the same as other people have
had when unexpectedly detected in some shameful deed.
He was unable to prepare his face for the situation caused
by his wife's discovery of his sin. Instead of getting
offended, denying it, justifying himself, asking forgive-
ness, or even showing indifference  anything would
have been better than what he really did  in spite of
himself (by a reflex action of the brain as Stepan Arka-
dyevitch explained it, for he loved Physiology) abso-
lutely in spite of himself he suddenly smiled with his
ordinary good-humored and therefore stupid smile.

He could not forgive himself for that stupid smile.
When Dolly saw that smile, she trembled as with phys-
ical pain, poured forth a torrent of bitter words, quite
in accordance with her natural temper, and fled from
the room. Since that time she had not been willing to
see her husband.

" That stupid smile caused the whole trouble,"
thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.

" But what is to be done about it, what is to be done } "
he asked himself in despair, and found no answer.
